Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this video
we're going to look at the projective quadruple
quad formula which is a projective analog of
the regular quadruple quad formula and somewhat
related but somewhat more complicated so let
me start by reminding you about the affiant
situation and we'll have a little bit of
a review of some important formulas and
results that we've already established that
we will need to understand this projector of
quadruple quad formula so we're looking at the
f fine one-dimensional situation points a1 a2
like this fundamental notion of the quadrants
between two points quadrants between these
two points is the difference between the
coordinates squared now if we have three
points we have a third point say a three then we
have three quadrants a--'s between these three
points and they satisfy the triple quad formula
which is really the fundamental formula in the
subject q1 plus q2 plus q3 squared equals
2 times Q 1 squared plus Q 2 squared plus
Q 3 squared and then we had an extension
of that 24 points we add northpoint a for
now between these four points there are in fact
six quadratures but there's only four of them
that are involved here and those quadrants azhar
the quadrants from a1 to a2 and then from a2 to
a3 from a three to a four and back from a four
to A one so cyclically going around a particular
direction a1 a2 a3 a4 so we call those q1 q2 q3
and q4 then they are related by this particular
formula q1 plus q2 plus q3 plus Q for all squared
minus two times Q 1 squared plus Q 2 squared plus
Q 3 squared plus Q 2 squared that all squared
equals 64 times q1 q2 q3 q4 it's a pretty big
formula but it's just the way things are just what
happens when you have four points on a line and
you're interested in the relationship between
four quadrants is formed by going cyclically
around so these are two fundamental formulas
that we want to generalize to the projective
situation motivated by those two formulas we
introduced two special functions the first one
we called Archimedes function so a little ABC
was just the difference between the left and
the right hand side of the triple quad formula
and this difference can also be rewritten in an
asymmetrical formats for a B minus a plus B minus
C squared this is actually the more efficient for
calculation by hand and we'll say that three
numbers a B and C form a quad triple precisely
when we apply Archimedes function to them we get
zero in other words when they satisfy the triple
quad formula and similarly we take the difference
between the left and the right hand sides of the
quadruple quad formula and define Q of ABCD to
be that difference you call that the quadruple
quad function okay these quantities have we saw
interesting geometrical interpretation in one
dimension higher so they originated as results
for points on a line but they end up somewhat
miraculously telling us very important things
about what's happening in two dimensions in
particular Archimedes function basically controls
the area of a triangle with side quadrants as q1
q2 and q3 so this particular expression if we
plug in q1 q2 and q3 we get what we call the
quadri of the triangle which was 16 times the
square of the area and similarly the quadruple
quad function played a role when we were talking
about the quad Rhea of a cyclic quadrilateral one
that was contained in circle so although the quad
Rhea wasn't exactly this there was some formula
for the quad Rhea that utilized this thing in us
from a major way so the basic idea is that even
though these things come from one-dimensional
situations three points and four points in the
one-dimensional a fine situation they nevertheless
end up having important meaning and interpretation
in two dimensions okay so now let's go over to
the projective situation where we're talking about
projective 1 points which are visualized as lines
through the origin in a two-dimensional a fine
setting so there is for example a projective one
point say a1 which is actually just a proportion
X 1 to y 1 enclosed in square brackets that's the
actual definition but it's interpreted as being
the line whose direction vector is x1 y1 through
the origin and here's another one a 2 which is x
2 2 y 2 so we have these two projective 1 points
and the basic metrical notion is the projective
quadrants little Q between a1 a2 and here's the
definition and it's the alternate form of the
definition that I started with so originally
we had a somewhat different definition but we
saw that it was expressible this way as well and
it will turn out that this particular form even
though it may seem a little bit more cumbersome
has the advantage that it generalizes a little
bit more smoothly to these other kinds of
geometries okay so what's involved there's
this a dot product involved we have two vectors
x1 y1 and x2 y2 the dot product between them is
the number X 1 X 2 plus y1 y2 and in terms of
that dot product we can write this projector
quadrants as 1 minus the dot product between x1
y1 and x2 y2 all squared in the numerator here
and here one factor is the dot product between
x1 y1 itself which is just the quadrants of that
vector so x1 squared plus y1 squared and here
another factor same thing for the vector X 2 y
2 so now here we have x1 squared plus y1 squared
and here we have x2 squared plus y2 squared and
the advantage in thinking about it this way is
that we can directly change the dot product and
get a new kind of quadrants for example in the
red situation if we change that plus sign to a
minus sign then this formula still is exactly the
right formula for the red projected quadrants ok
so now we want to look at what happens when
we have three such projective 1 points so a 1
a 2 and a third one a 3 then we will have three
projective quadrants between those 1 points and
then the relationship between those three numbers
q1 q2 and q3 is the projective triple quad formula
looks quite like the affine triple quad formula
with this additional cubic term for q1 q2 and q3
and the same formula also appears in the rational
trigonometry of a plane and the affine setting
where it's known as the triple spread formula so
an ordinary two dimensional Euclidean geometry
this quantity is referred to as a spread and
that's the reason why this is called the triple
spread formula and we saw that it has a meaning an
interpretation in terms of well the relationship
between three quadrants a--'s formed by it
triangle contained in a circle whose diameter
or diameter quadrants was one so that was like our
core circle the diameter of one and three points
on it then the three quadrants is q1 q2 and q3
capital q1 q2 and q3 turn out to satisfy exactly
this relation so again we start with something
that's really a one-dimensional situation in
the projective setting and we end up getting an
important formula that applies for two dimensional
Euclidean geometry so this is the analog of
the ordinary triple quad formula a natural
question is what is their protective analog of the
quadruple quad formula involving four projective
one points so before we get to four points let's
just introduce this terminology for a function
that captures the projective triple quad formula
will call this a triple spread function s of ABC
is just the difference between the left and the
right hand sides of this projective triple quad
formula or if you like the triple spread formula
and parallel to what we did four quadrants is will
say that a set of three numbers a B and C is a
spread triple if it satisfies this projective
triple quad formula in other words a capital s of
a b c equals 0 okay so now we can imagine having
for project 21 points for example a 13 1 a 2 122 a
3-1 21 and a 4 3 2 2 so we've seen these projected
1 points before and we've calculated already a
few of these projective quadrants between them so
if we denote by q1 the quadrants between a1 and a2
between here and here that turned out to be a half
between a two at a three is nine tenths between a
3 and a 4 is 25 / 20 six and between a 4 and a 1
is 9 over 130 and you can check the formulas make
sure that those are correct so what we're really
interested in here is the question what is the
relationship between these four numbers in a sense
that if you knew three of them could you figure
out what the fourth one is or at least narrow it
down to a small list possibilities so this is
another great exercise for you to do if you're
an aspiring mathematician or you just want to
challenge to see if you can figure out what is the
relation in general between these four projective
cuadras flown by for projecting one points the
projective analog of the quadruple quad formula
it's a bit of a challenge it's not so easy it'll
probably be a a day's work or maybe even more
but it's a great thing for you to do to have a go
okay so here is our formula the projective
quadruple quad formula so the setting is
we have four projective one points and we've
defined q1 to be the quadrants between a1 a2 q2
the quadrants between 82 and 83 q3 the quadrants
between a3 a4 and q4 the quadrants between a 4 and
a 1 these are all projective quadrants asst in the
setting of a projective line and the relation is
that are of q1 q2 q3 q4 equals 0 where r is yet
a new function it's this one so it's defined in
terms of what it does two numbers a B C and D so
let's have a look at it it's quite an imposing
formula but it's a sort of God given relation
in in mathematics it's sort of central algebraic
relation that just sits right there at the heart
of one dimensional geometry so it's a plus B plus
C plus D all squared minus two times a squared
plus B squared plus c squared plus d squared so
that's already kind of familiar from the offline
quadruple quad formula but now we have some cubic
terms and also according term so minus four times
the product of all the possible products of three
of them a b c plus a BD + a CD plus b c d plus 8
times ABCD and now all of that squared minus 64
ABCD times 1 minus a 1 minus b1 minus c1 minus D
so if we take these four quadrants a--'s plug it
in here we're going to get zero which is to say
another way of say that is that this quantity
here this thing squared equals 64 ABCD times the
stinkier so for example the four numbers that we
obtained one half nine ten 25-26 nine 130th
if you plug them into here you will get zero
now let me notice that when a b c and d are
small like close to zero then inside this big
bracket here we have things which are essentially
quadratic and we have things which are cubic and
quartic and if a b c and d are very small then the
quadratic things are going to be also very small
but the cubic things are going to be even much
smaller and the quartic thing is even smaller
yet so if we ignore the cubic and quadratic
things then this part of it is just the same as
the affine quadruple quad formula and this part
of it is just the same as the affine right-hand
side because if a B and C and D are very small
then these numbers are close to being one and we
would just get 64 ABCD the same thing is the right
hand side for the affluent situation so this is
some kind of generalization extension of the of
the affine situation but there's something very
remarkable about this particular expression and we
can see that by having a look at these four values
that we got in that particular example and just
for fun pretending that we didn't know what's a
one of them was suppose that we didn't know what
the fourth one was and we just replaced with an X
so we took this expression here replaced a B and
C with these three numbers and we replace d with
an unknown X then we begin a polynomial in X and
you might think it's a degree eight because this
is generally degree eight but in any one variable
it's actually only of degree 4 so if you plug X
in here you'll see that the actual powers of X
the maximum is for which you get by taking say
the d squared here for example all squared will be
giving you a d to the fourth okay so if you look
at this thing with these particular values with
an x in at nine over 130th then remarkably this
expression factors as a clean product of four
factors one of the factors is not surprisingly
X minus nine over 130 because we know that's
actually a solution but there are these other
solutions to their is 121 over 130 which happens
to add up with this one to give us one and these
other two also add up to give one there 49 over
130 and 81 over 130 so this is something special
that's going on here and you can experiment
around for yourself if you have the computer
you can program your computer to input this kind
of thing if you have some algebraic manipulation
software which I hope that you do then it's really
fun playing with this function and discovering
things about it and I suspect there's a lot of
very interesting things to be discovered about
this particular expression this is just starting
kind of example to make you start thinking hmm
this is very interesting so natural question is
what would happen if we place not this one but
say this one with X then we also get something
similar and similarly for these two we get these
different expressions and then what would be the
various relationships between all these numbers
that are appearing here in these four factored
forms sort of a whole sea of possibilities emerges
and actually very good and fun place to make some
investigations all right so how in the world could
we possibly discover this remarkable formula
and how are we going to prove it well let me
just establish a few things kind of ingredients
then we're going to need one of those things is
an altered form for the projective triple quad
formula the much simpler situation that just looks
like this that we've been talking about in our
last few videos so this is the basic projective
triple quad formula and here are some there rance
or equivalent reformulations you get by just sort
of rearranging the various variables so I probably
told you about this one before but it's well worth
having a look at and here we've written this thing
as a quadratic just involving seat so we've taken
the C square there and then the coefficient of
see here and then the things not involving see
there this is expressing it as a quadratic NC
and here's what one step further where we've
actually completed the square thinking of this as
a quadratic in C so now it's C minus something all
squared equals something not involving see and we
see that it's quite pleasant we get C minus this
quantity a plus B minus 2a be all of that squared
equals for a B times 1 minus a times 1 minus B
same kind of expression that ends up appearing on
that right hand side of this projective quadruple
point formula okay so your first exercise is to
check these equivalences just make sure that yes
indeed these three are just reformulations of
this basic projective triple quad formula the
other ingredient that we're going to need is the
quadratic compatibility theorem that we talked
about in math foundations 125 and that's actually
the first theorem of my book divine proportions
so it concerns two quadratic equations in x
written in the form X minus P 1 squared equals
Q 1 and X minus P 2 squared equals Q 2 so we've
already completed the square we have these two
quadratic equations in X and we were interested
in when they are compatible in other words when
they have a common solution X and it turned out
that they have a common solution X precisely when
the three quantities q1 q2 and the difference
between p1 and p2 squared form a quad triple
in other words if we apply Archimedes function or
the triple quad function to them we get zero and
in this case moreover we can say actually what
that common solution is it's the average of p1
and p2 minus the quotient q1 minus q2 over 2 times
p1 minus p2 okay so now let's proceed to proof of
our big formula that projective quadruple quad
formula so the setup is we have four projective
one points a1 a2 a3 a4 and here are the four
projective quadrants 'as that we're interested
in q1 q2 q3 q4 is before I'm going to define one
more additional projective quadrants the quadrants
between a one and A three I'm going to call that
p and we're going to observe that then q1 q2 and P
are forming a spread triple because they're really
concerned with the three points a1 a2 and a3 from
a1 to a2 we have q1 from a2 to a3 we have q2 and
from a three day one we have what we're calling
p so these three numbers necessarily satisfy
the projective triple quad formula similarly
the points a 3 a 4 and a 1 give us another three
projective quadrants 'as that satisfy that same
formula so q3 q4 and p are another spread triple
so this is the basic strategy in fact it's the
same strategy that we used back in the FI case
when we went from the triple quad formula to the
quadruple quad formula we're just following the
same procedure here so there's nothing really
dramatically different so we're going to take
the fact that we have two equations here and
we're going to write those equations down and
we're going to see that the fact that they have
a common solution tells us something about q1 q2
q3 and q4 that's something is exactly the relation
that we're going to be wanting all right so let's
see how to put these various things together to
get our projective quadruple quad formula here
it is right here this is what we're aiming for
and so here's the argument there's essentially two
steps using both of those ingredients that we've
already talked about so the first thing to do is
to write down the fact that q1 q2 and P satisfy
the projective triple quad formula but we're going
to write that formula down in that alternate form
that we call the star a few slides back where
it's now a quadratic equation P minus something
all squared equals something not involving p ok
so there's p minus q1 plus q2 minus 2 q1 q2 all
of that squared equals for q1 q2 1 minus q1 1
minus q2 and similarly the other spread triple
was p q3 and q4 so we have an exactly parallel
equation involving q3 and q4 instead of q1 q2
right so now we have two quadratic equations
which visibly have a common solution p all right
so that's exactly the situation of the quadratic
compatibility theorem the quadratic compatibility
theorem says that there must then be a relation
between this number this number and the difference
between these two numbers squared so let me remind
you what the condition is so in the quadratic
compatibility theorem this whole thing was called
q1 this whole thing was called q2 this whole thing
was called p one and this one was called p2
and the fact that we had this common solution
implied that this q1 this q2 and the difference p
1 minus p 2 squared satisfied the standard triple
quad formula okay alright so what does this triple
quad formula look like well we're going to use the
alternate form for the triple quad formula which
is not the symmetrical form but if you have a B
and C the form that a plus B minus C squared
equals for a be okay so we're going to take
the difference here this thing minus this thing
all squared we're going to subtract this quantity
and also subtract this quantity and square all
of that that should be equal to four times the
product of this with this that's the triple quad
formula apply to this quantity this quantity and
the difference between these two things squared
and so that's the relation that follows from the
quadratic compatibility theorem by analyzing these
two quadratic equations that we get by looking at
three of our four projective one points at a time
this 3 and then that three okay it has pretty
well the form that we want the right hand side is
just the where we want it and then the left hand
side is something squared so if you examine what's
inside this bracket here it turns out that you can
rearrange that here it's not very symmetrical in
q1 q2 q3 and q4 but it turns out that it actually
is a symmetrical function and you can expand it
out and rearrange it and convince yourself that
what's inside really can be expressed in this way
the sum of the q squared minus 2 times the sum of
the squares of the ques- four times the sum of
triples of the Q's plus 8 times the product of
all 4 q's so all of that squared this big product
64 the product of the q's times the product of the
one- queues and that is the projective quadruple
quad formula it's just god-given fabulous kind of
thing and it's not something to be scared of okay
this is the direction that mathematics is kind of
going to go okay there are going to be more and
more of these kinds of formulas 100 years from now
this will be like a baby formula almost trivial
okay we're going to see a lot more and more bigger
and bigger and bigger and formulas now we really
need our computers to help us manipulate them and
understand them and work with them but they're
going to really be the core of understanding
higher and higher and more complicated and deeper
relationships ok so this projective quadruple quad
formula or this projective quadruple quad function
r has very interesting properties and here's a few
exercises that allow you to investigate some of
those properties and they're all related with
what happens when you replace a with 1 minus a
that's sort of an important kind of symmetry and
this is quite a remarkable our relation here
that I want you to investigate see if you can
prove this algebraically that are of 1 minus a
1 minus b1 minus c1 minus D is actually the same
as our ABCD so if you replace each of ABC and D
with 1 minus them then those four numbers also
satisfy this protective quadruple quad formula in
this next exercise show that if one of these four
numbers is a half then you can replace any one
of these numbers say a with 1 minus a and the our
function doesn't change and in the same kind of
spirit so that you can always replace two of them
so a and B with 1 minus a and 1 minus B and the
quantity does not change independent of whether
one of them is a half or not so this is actually
a stronger result in this one because if you know
this one then you know this one as well and
you might like to see if you can find out some
additional aspects of this function my guess
is there's all kinds of interesting things to
be discovered and I'm happy if you tell me some
cool things that you can figure out okay in our
next video we're going to see why this function R
and this projective quadruple quad formula is so
interesting even for two-dimensional ordinary
Euclidean geometry we're going to see that it
sheds light on a very classical topic that has
been studied for centuries which is if you have
a cyclic quadrilateral what is the radius
of the circle that it's sitting on or for
us what is the quadrants circum quadrants
of that circle so it turns out that this
projective quadruple quad formula is intimately
connected with this question very interesting
development so I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening